---
layout: post
title: "Building OSo (RTOS) Part 1: Introduction"
date: 2024-11-15 00:32:13
description: Introduction to OSo and RTOS fundamentals. This is the first post about my journey creating a Real-Time Operating System from scratch.
tags: rtos
categories: OSo
tabs: true
---

<!-- In this blog series, I will write about my journey creating a Real-Time Operating System (RTOS), OSo,
from scratch.  -->

In this post, I give a brief introduction to OSo, its high-level architecture, system capabilities, and RTOS
fundamentals while outlining the next blog posts in the series. If you prefer to learn by doing, you can check OSo's repository on [GitHub](https://github.com/roemvaar/oso).

## Why Build an RTOS?

<!-- Discuss the inspiration and motivation for creating OSo. -->

While working at John Deere, I started working on an Embedded Linux project with little
operating systems (OS) background. This project represented one of the hardest challenges in my career
because it was the first time I would develop such a complex system.

I was always curious as to how operating systems worked and how they were implemented, I tackled this
by reading *Operating Systems: Three Easy Pieces* (OSTEP) by Remzi and Andrea
Arpaci-Dusseau and all the pieces began to come together, but there was something missing. I'm an engineer and learn things by getting my hands dirty. I decided to work hands-on in the Linux kernel
version 5, which was complex for someone lacking the fundamentals. But things needed to be better; I had to learn the fundamentals and go from there.

I enrolled in the CS 652 Real-Time Programming (trains) class offered at the University of Waterloo, where
the main goal is to design and implement a real-time operating system. I had to 
unenroll from the class for personal reasons, but the seed had been planted in me.

In October 2024, I started working on my real-time operating system, OSo, during my free time.

<!-- Mention the real-time constraints and applications that make RTOS unique. -->

## Overview of RTOS Fundamentals

<!-- Discuss how RTOS differs from general-purpose OSs. -->

A general-purpose operating system (OS) differs from a Real-Time Operating System (RTOS) mainly on
its design goal. An OS is meant to have high throughput while an RTOS needs to meet its deadlines.

<!-- Describe key characteristics of RTOS: determinism, scheduling, and time-sensitive operations. -->

In real-time systems, we have different ways to categorize all the different "flavors" of real-time
requirements. For a thorough explanaition, check the Chapter 1 of the *Real-Time Systems* book by Liu.
For our purpose, we only care about hard and soft deadlines.

## OSo Goals and Constraints

<!-- Outline the goals of the OSo project (e.g., lightweight, educational, modular). -->

The main goal of this project is to create a small real-time operating system for "real-world" embedded
systems.

I started from scratch to get a better understanding of things that I might take for granted,
such as booting, device interaction, memory management, timing, threading and concurrency.

<!-- Mention the hardware requirements and limitations. -->

The first version targets the ARM Cortex-A architecture to support the Raspberry Pi 4b+,
which is an accessible development board. For later versions, I will refactor the hardware-specific
code out of the main kernel logic to support other architectures, such as the modern RISC-V
architecture.

## OSo High-Level Architecture and Design

I followed the KISS (Keep it simple, stupid!) principle to the best of my capacities.

When we talk about operating system design, there are mainly two main approaches that must be commercial
operating systems use the microkernel and the monolithic kernel.
There is a tradeoff between these two schools of thought. With the microkernel, we have a core kernel
that only has minimal functionality, and we have all the services as servers, this helps to improve
fault tolerance in the overall system, if a server fails, the rest of the system still works. In the
monolithic approach, if a system fails, it can crash the whole system. On the other hand, in the
monolithic kernel, the inter-process communication is less convoluted. QNX is an example of a microkernel.
The Linux kernel is monolithic, although some people argue it's a "hybrid" kernel
thanks to its modularity achieved via modules that can be hooked during runtime.

I decided to use C as the programming language for OSo because I know it well. Another hot shot at the market as of the writing of this blog is Rust; I'm keen to learn this
programming language since it's gaining a lot of traction in the Linux kernel community and embedded
software development, but I didn't want to shoot myself in the foot. Building an operating system is
a complex task in itself; trying to do it with a language that you don't have full command of would
be a recipe for disaster.

OSo provides an API to application programmers that helps them create and manipulate tasks, message-passing
for inter-process communication, interrupt processing for the process to await for an event, name server
interface, clock server interface and input/output server interface.

For version 1.0, I made the kernel internals the simplest, i.e., the mechanisms and policies
that enable users to use system resources and run programs. I decided to set a fixed number of tasks to 
schedule functions; OSo has a static number of priorities, where higher priority tasks execute before lower priority
ones, while functions with the same priority have a round-robin untie criterion.

## Final Thoughts

It goes without saying in tech, but quoting one of the greatest scientists ever, "we stand on the
shoulders of giants," and this occasion is no exception. I tried my best to design and
code myself for a better understanding of core concepts, but a lot of my work wouldn't have been
possible without the guidance of different materials of smart people who worked on this task before
me, such as the [CS 652 material](https://student.cs.uwaterloo.ca/~cs452/F23/), [rpi4-osdev](https://www.rpi4os.com/)
by Adam Greenwood-Byrne, and [raspberry-pi-os](https://s-matyukevich.github.io/raspberry-pi-os/docs/lesson01/rpi-os.html) by Sergey Matyukevich.

I plan to write a series of blog posts relating to my work on this project. I don't want
to make this a step-by-step tutorial on how to create your own OS, there are plenty of resources out
there to do that (I recommend starting by looking at the raspberry-pi-os that I pointed out previously),
instead, my main goal is to improve my technical writing abilities and use these blog posts to
present the design and development of my work in a structured fashion, along with the challenges,
and how I overcame them.

<!-- Briefly describe the upcoming posts and what each will cover. -->

In the following blog posts for the series, I'm going to write about bootstrapping the kernel and running
the first C code, a more detailed entry about kernel design, tasks and how to handle them inside our kernel,
scheduling, inter-process communication, memory and resource management, and finally, the application layer,
and real-world test cases.
